docs/AI.md, before:

# AI at Shuffle
With AI becoming a larger part of the Automation space, the goal with AI at Shuffle is provide it in a deterministic, controllable and responsible way. We do not intend to implement chat systems - just to make certain mechanisms in Shuffle easier to use over time.

## Using LLMs 
Shuffle by default provides LLM credits using the OpenAI GPT-5-mini model. This is available to a certain level to those who use our Cloud or Hybrid offerings. [Read about self-hosted models](#how-to-set-up-a-self-hosted-ai-model-with-shuffle).

## AI Agents
Agents are a way to have an AI model interact with the world. In Shuffle, this means using tools (playbooks) to perform actions. We intend to provide controllable, deterministic Agents that can be used to perform tasks.

**Some areas has been built for:**
- Tool Usage  (Collection, Enrichment, Detection & Response)
- Reasoning   (Helps with workflow building)
- Correlation (Historical alerts and cases)
- RAG         (Docs: Knowledge base usage)

They can additionally talk to each other and be published for third party use. 

**This is in private Beta and is not generally available yet. If you would like to try it, please reach out to support@shuffler.io and ask about AI Agents.**

### MCP
TBA: Coming soon

### Agent Continuations
Continuations are a way of changing or continuing the behavior of a previous AI Agent run. This makes it possible to "talk" to the agent after it is done with a task.

The field will automatically show up at the bottom, below the final output of the Agent run. 

<img width="1273" height="563" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e09e937e-e9df-4a52-9d98-624b18e35d61" />

### Finding AI Agent runs
As with all platform-wide debugging in Shuffle, AI Agent runs are available in the [/workflows/debug](/workflows/debug) UI. By selecting "Agent Runs" at the top of the Workflow list, you will be given an overview of everything the agentic system has and will do in your environment.

<img width="1211" height="556" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/fd5aec29-3052-4e94-ade5-7199faa96342" />

### Workflow Generation
TBA: Coming soon. The goal here is to take active actions and make tested and well-configured workflows out of them.

## Singul
Singul works against vendor-locking with our translator for different providers of the same tools, such as Slack vs Teams vs Discord, or Splunk vs Elastic vs QRadar). It uses LLMs to understand the context of what you are trying to perform, and makes a determinsitic translation to use a standard such as OCSF or STIX. This is a powerful way to avoid vendor lock-in, and to make your automation more future-proof. Made by the Shuffle team.

Read the [usage Shuffle Docs here](https://github.com/Shuffle/openapi-apps/blob/master/docs/singul.md)
Website: [https://singul.io](https://singul.io)

## Using AI in Workflows
TBA: Coming soon

### LLM inference
TBA

### Conditions
TBA

## App generation
App generation is a system built to generate Rest API apps from documentation URLs. It works by emulating a browser with which it crawls the documentation.

<img width="1281" height="425" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/002f9079-b4fa-4c3f-8cf9-54ad29a65c07" />

### 1. Navigate to the App page
Go to [/apps](/apps)

### 2. Click "Create an App"

### 3. Click "Generate from Documentation"

<img width="601" height="417" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f82fa8d1-61f7-4165-bf00-b10deb4e773c" />

### 4. Paste a URL and hit "Generate". This may take up to a few minutes.

Sample URL: https://docs.virustotal.com/reference/ip-info

<img width="617" height="371" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1ecf31a9-c85c-439d-b6b3-1dbb5d721afe" />

### 5. You get a valid App that can be used in seconds!

<img width="621" height="579" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a0fac4a2-a5b3-433a-808d-0615f5e29bb5" />

### 6. Save it, then start using it in workflows. 

## Workflow generation
This guide will walk you through creating a complete, functional Shuffle workflow in seconds, just by describing what you want to do in plain English.

### 1: Navigate to the Workflow Page
* In the navigation sidebar on the left, click on "Workflows". This will take you to the `/workflows` page where you'll see your list of existing workflows.

### 2: Click "Create Workflow"
* In the top right corner of the Workflows page, click the "Create Workflow" button.

<img width="1200" height="966" alt="create_workflow" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8938b032-db6f-4f25-b8bb-578f241c638c" />

### 3: Describe Your Goal

****You have two options: writing a description or uploading a flowchart.****


***Option A: Write a Text Description***

<img width="600" height="650" alt="AI_generate_page" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c756caf1-a32b-4b56-bd5a-81fc2ec879dd" />


* At the top of the canvas, you will see a text box that says "Describe your workflow in natural language...". This is where the magic happens.
* Click inside this box and type out the process you want to automate.

**Tips for a Great Description:**
* **Be Specific:** Instead of "Check a URL," try "Check a URL in VirusTotal."
* **Name Your Tools:** Mention the specific apps you want to use (e.g., "Open a ticket in Jira," "Send a message to Slack").

**Example Description:**
  When a phishing email is reported, get the URL from the email body. Check the URL's reputation in VirusTotal. If the score is above 5, create a new ticket in      TheHive and send a high-priority alert to the 'security-alerts' channel in Slack.

***Option B: Upload a Flowchart Image***

If you prefer to visualize your process, you can upload an image of a flowchart. The AI will analyze the shapes, text, and connections in the diagram to build your workflow.

<img width="600" height="650" alt="flowchart" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a484e0ed-3f21-4a3c-a8f3-dbd333a893e4" />

* Look for the large box below the "Description" field that says "Generate Workflow from Flowchart" with a cloud upload icon.

* Click anywhere inside this box. This will open your computer's file browser.

* Select a flowchart image (e.g., a .png, .jpg, or .jpeg file up to 5MB in size) from your computer.

**Pro Tip:** Add a Description for Even Better Results
Even after uploading your flowchart, we recommend adding a brief text description in the "Description" box (mentioned in Option A).

Think of this description as extra instructions for the AI model. It helps clarify any details or ambiguities in the flowchart and provides specific context, leading to an even more accurate and powerful workflow.

**Example description to add:**

This flowchart shows our phishing response process. The goal is to automate the URL check with VirusTotal and create a Jira ticket for malicious findings.

**Important Note for Self-Hosted Users:**
The ability to process images depends entirely on your AI model. This feature is fully supported when using Shuffle Cloud's default model. If you are using a self-hosted model (like Ollama), you must ensure it is a multimodal model (one that can understand both text and images) for this feature to work correctly.


### 4: Generate the Workflow

* Once you are satisfied with your description or uploaded flowchart, click the 'AI Generate' button.
* Wait a few moments. The AI will analyze your request and automatically build the workflow on the canvas, complete with the right apps and connections.

### 5: Review and Customize
* The AI-generated workflow is a powerful starting point. You can now:

* Click on each app to configure its specific settings (e.g., authenticating with your Jira account).

* Drag and drop new apps onto the canvas.

* Modify the connections between the apps.

**Congratulations! You've just built an automation workflow using AI.**

## Editing a Workflow
This is a work in progress. Currently in Alpha. Contact support@shuffler.io if you would like to be a tester.

## Using self-hosted AI models

While Shuffle's Cloud platform provides AI credits to get you started, connecting your own self-hosted AI model gives you ultimate control and flexibility. This guide will walk you through the process.

**Before you configure Shuffle, please ensure you have the following ready:**

1. A Server to Run the AI: You need a computer that Shuffle can reach over the network. This can be a VM, physical server or a cloud instance.
2. We recommend Ollama as the simplest way to run local AI models. Go to [Download Ollama](https://ollama.com/download) to install it on your server. After installation, make sure the Ollama service is running.
3. Once Ollama is installed, you need a model for it to serve. For a great starting point, we recommend the gpt-oss model. It's a powerful and versatile model perfect for general tasks. (You can read more about it in Ollama's official announcement [here](https://ollama.com/blog/gpt-oss)). Of course, you can use any model available on Ollama. Our gpt-oss suggestion is just a recommendation to make getting started easy.


Open your server's terminal and run this command:

```bash
ollama run gpt-oss:20b
```

### Setting Up Environment Variables in Shuffle

Once your self-hosted AI model is running, you can proceed with setting up the necessary environment variables in Shuffle.

**Step 1: Find Your AI Server Details**

You will need the following information from your self-hosted AI server:

* The full URL of the API (e.g., http://192.168.1.55:11434/v1).
* The exact name of the model you want to use (e.g., llama3).
* An API key (if your server requires authentication).

**Step 2: Set the Environment Variables**

`AI_API_URL` (Required)

* What it is: The full URL to your AI server's API endpoint.

Example: 
```bash
AI_API_URL=http://localhost:11434/v1
```

`AI_MODEL` (Required)

* What it is: The exact name of the model you want Shuffle to use.

Example:
```bash
AI_MODEL=llama3
```

AI_API_KEY (Optional)

* What it is: The API key or token if your server requires authentication.

Example:
```bash
AI_API_KEY=sk-mysecretkey123
```

Shuffle can support any self-hosted model that implements the OpenAI API interface. Examples include Ollama, local LLMs wrapped with OpenAI-compatible endpoints, or any other model that exposes the same API.

Once these are set, there is no need to restart your Shuffle backend server as the checks happen in real-time. The AI features will be automatically enabled, allowing you to use them immediately.

**Note: You need to refresh the Shuffle UI page in your browser for the new AI features to appear.**

## AI for quicker Support
TBA: Coming soon. The goal is to provide quick answers to typical questions, and otherwise forward to the Shuffle team.

## Troubleshooting

* Ensure your AI server is running and reachable at the URL you provided.
* If using authentication, double-check the API key.
* Use the exact model name available on your self-hosted AI instance.

If anything else goes wrong, please contact support@shuffler.io

Commit message:

Enhance MCP section with usage details and examples
Added detailed explanation of MCPs and their usage in Shuffle, including API reference and links to related products.

docs/AI.md, after:

# AI at Shuffle
With AI becoming a larger part of the Automation space, the goal with AI at Shuffle is provide it in a deterministic, controllable and responsible way. We do not intend to implement chat systems - just to make certain mechanisms in Shuffle easier to use over time.

## Using LLMs 
Shuffle by default provides LLM credits using the OpenAI GPT-5-mini model. This is available to a certain level to those who use our Cloud or Hybrid offerings. [Read about self-hosted models](#how-to-set-up-a-self-hosted-ai-model-with-shuffle).

## AI Agents
Agents are a way to have an AI model interact with the world. In Shuffle, this means using tools (playbooks) to perform actions. We intend to provide controllable, deterministic Agents that can be used to perform tasks.

**Some areas has been built for:**
- Tool Usage  (Collection, Enrichment, Detection & Response)
- Reasoning   (Helps with workflow building)
- Correlation (Historical alerts and cases)
- RAG         (Docs: Knowledge base usage)

They can additionally talk to each other and be published for third party use. 

**This is in private Beta and is not generally available yet. If you would like to try it, please reach out to support@shuffler.io and ask about AI Agents.**

### MCP
MCPs are the concept of having an AI Agent decide what actions to do within a specific pool of available actions. It is typically used by agents as to have them be specialised, but there is nothing stopping them from being used directly as well.

In Shuffle, EVERY SINGLE APP has an MCP. This is available with the `POST /api/v1/apps/{appid}/mcp` API and is based on the [MCP standard](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/docs/getting-started/intro).

The easiest way to try one in Shuffle is to go to [/agents](/agents), choosing an app (or more), and telling it what to use it for. This makes the agent act as an MCP. 

<img width="946" height="316" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/662d05ef-b3ae-4bba-90d6-9cb4446fb0de" />

They are also available for each app in our upcoming [Security Bundle product Shutdown](https://security.shuffler.io/apps/outlook_office365). 

<img width="778" height="269" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f9eed81b-4251-41b6-b3c6-c2a12c29d7e6" />


### Agent Continuations
Continuations are a way of changing or continuing the behavior of a previous AI Agent run. This makes it possible to "talk" to the agent after it is done with a task.

The field will automatically show up at the bottom, below the final output of the Agent run. 

<img width="1273" height="563" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e09e937e-e9df-4a52-9d98-624b18e35d61" />

### Finding AI Agent runs
As with all platform-wide debugging in Shuffle, AI Agent runs are available in the [/workflows/debug](/workflows/debug) UI. By selecting "Agent Runs" at the top of the Workflow list, you will be given an overview of everything the agentic system has and will do in your environment.

<img width="1211" height="556" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/fd5aec29-3052-4e94-ade5-7199faa96342" />

### Workflow Generation
TBA: Coming soon. The goal here is to take active actions and make tested and well-configured workflows out of them.

## Singul
Singul works against vendor-locking with our translator for different providers of the same tools, such as Slack vs Teams vs Discord, or Splunk vs Elastic vs QRadar). It uses LLMs to understand the context of what you are trying to perform, and makes a determinsitic translation to use a standard such as OCSF or STIX. This is a powerful way to avoid vendor lock-in, and to make your automation more future-proof. Made by the Shuffle team.

Read the [usage Shuffle Docs here](https://github.com/Shuffle/openapi-apps/blob/master/docs/singul.md)
Website: [https://singul.io](https://singul.io)

## Using AI in Workflows
TBA: Coming soon

### LLM inference
TBA

### Conditions
TBA

## App generation
App generation is a system built to generate Rest API apps from documentation URLs. It works by emulating a browser with which it crawls the documentation.

<img width="1281" height="425" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/002f9079-b4fa-4c3f-8cf9-54ad29a65c07" />

### 1. Navigate to the App page
Go to [/apps](/apps)

### 2. Click "Create an App"

### 3. Click "Generate from Documentation"

<img width="601" height="417" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f82fa8d1-61f7-4165-bf00-b10deb4e773c" />

### 4. Paste a URL and hit "Generate". This may take up to a few minutes.

Sample URL: https://docs.virustotal.com/reference/ip-info

<img width="617" height="371" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1ecf31a9-c85c-439d-b6b3-1dbb5d721afe" />

### 5. You get a valid App that can be used in seconds!

<img width="621" height="579" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a0fac4a2-a5b3-433a-808d-0615f5e29bb5" />

### 6. Save it, then start using it in workflows. 

## Workflow generation
This guide will walk you through creating a complete, functional Shuffle workflow in seconds, just by describing what you want to do in plain English.

### 1: Navigate to the Workflow Page
* In the navigation sidebar on the left, click on "Workflows". This will take you to the `/workflows` page where you'll see your list of existing workflows.

### 2: Click "Create Workflow"
* In the top right corner of the Workflows page, click the "Create Workflow" button.

<img width="1200" height="966" alt="create_workflow" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8938b032-db6f-4f25-b8bb-578f241c638c" />

### 3: Describe Your Goal

****You have two options: writing a description or uploading a flowchart.****


***Option A: Write a Text Description***

<img width="600" height="650" alt="AI_generate_page" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c756caf1-a32b-4b56-bd5a-81fc2ec879dd" />


* At the top of the canvas, you will see a text box that says "Describe your workflow in natural language...". This is where the magic happens.
* Click inside this box and type out the process you want to automate.

**Tips for a Great Description:**
* **Be Specific:** Instead of "Check a URL," try "Check a URL in VirusTotal."
* **Name Your Tools:** Mention the specific apps you want to use (e.g., "Open a ticket in Jira," "Send a message to Slack").

**Example Description:**
  When a phishing email is reported, get the URL from the email body. Check the URL's reputation in VirusTotal. If the score is above 5, create a new ticket in      TheHive and send a high-priority alert to the 'security-alerts' channel in Slack.

***Option B: Upload a Flowchart Image***

If you prefer to visualize your process, you can upload an image of a flowchart. The AI will analyze the shapes, text, and connections in the diagram to build your workflow.

<img width="600" height="650" alt="flowchart" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a484e0ed-3f21-4a3c-a8f3-dbd333a893e4" />

* Look for the large box below the "Description" field that says "Generate Workflow from Flowchart" with a cloud upload icon.

* Click anywhere inside this box. This will open your computer's file browser.

* Select a flowchart image (e.g., a .png, .jpg, or .jpeg file up to 5MB in size) from your computer.

**Pro Tip:** Add a Description for Even Better Results
Even after uploading your flowchart, we recommend adding a brief text description in the "Description" box (mentioned in Option A).

Think of this description as extra instructions for the AI model. It helps clarify any details or ambiguities in the flowchart and provides specific context, leading to an even more accurate and powerful workflow.

**Example description to add:**

This flowchart shows our phishing response process. The goal is to automate the URL check with VirusTotal and create a Jira ticket for malicious findings.

**Important Note for Self-Hosted Users:**
The ability to process images depends entirely on your AI model. This feature is fully supported when using Shuffle Cloud's default model. If you are using a self-hosted model (like Ollama), you must ensure it is a multimodal model (one that can understand both text and images) for this feature to work correctly.


### 4: Generate the Workflow

* Once you are satisfied with your description or uploaded flowchart, click the 'AI Generate' button.
* Wait a few moments. The AI will analyze your request and automatically build the workflow on the canvas, complete with the right apps and connections.

### 5: Review and Customize
* The AI-generated workflow is a powerful starting point. You can now:

* Click on each app to configure its specific settings (e.g., authenticating with your Jira account).

* Drag and drop new apps onto the canvas.

* Modify the connections between the apps.

**Congratulations! You've just built an automation workflow using AI.**

## Editing a Workflow
This is a work in progress. Currently in Alpha. Contact support@shuffler.io if you would like to be a tester.

## Using self-hosted AI models

While Shuffle's Cloud platform provides AI credits to get you started, connecting your own self-hosted AI model gives you ultimate control and flexibility. This guide will walk you through the process.

**Before you configure Shuffle, please ensure you have the following ready:**

1. A Server to Run the AI: You need a computer that Shuffle can reach over the network. This can be a VM, physical server or a cloud instance.
2. We recommend Ollama as the simplest way to run local AI models. Go to [Download Ollama](https://ollama.com/download) to install it on your server. After installation, make sure the Ollama service is running.
3. Once Ollama is installed, you need a model for it to serve. For a great starting point, we recommend the gpt-oss model. It's a powerful and versatile model perfect for general tasks. (You can read more about it in Ollama's official announcement [here](https://ollama.com/blog/gpt-oss)). Of course, you can use any model available on Ollama. Our gpt-oss suggestion is just a recommendation to make getting started easy.


Open your server's terminal and run this command:

```bash
ollama run gpt-oss:20b
```

### Setting Up Environment Variables in Shuffle

Once your self-hosted AI model is running, you can proceed with setting up the necessary environment variables in Shuffle.

**Step 1: Find Your AI Server Details**

You will need the following information from your self-hosted AI server:

* The full URL of the API (e.g., http://192.168.1.55:11434/v1).
* The exact name of the model you want to use (e.g., llama3).
* An API key (if your server requires authentication).

**Step 2: Set the Environment Variables**

`AI_API_URL` (Required)

* What it is: The full URL to your AI server's API endpoint.

Example: 
```bash
AI_API_URL=http://localhost:11434/v1
```

`AI_MODEL` (Required)

* What it is: The exact name of the model you want Shuffle to use.

Example:
```bash
AI_MODEL=llama3
```

AI_API_KEY (Optional)

* What it is: The API key or token if your server requires authentication.

Example:
```bash
AI_API_KEY=sk-mysecretkey123
```

Shuffle can support any self-hosted model that implements the OpenAI API interface. Examples include Ollama, local LLMs wrapped with OpenAI-compatible endpoints, or any other model that exposes the same API.

Once these are set, there is no need to restart your Shuffle backend server as the checks happen in real-time. The AI features will be automatically enabled, allowing you to use them immediately.

**Note: You need to refresh the Shuffle UI page in your browser for the new AI features to appear.**

## AI for quicker Support
TBA: Coming soon. The goal is to provide quick answers to typical questions, and otherwise forward to the Shuffle team.

## Troubleshooting

* Ensure your AI server is running and reachable at the URL you provided.
* If using authentication, double-check the API key.
* Use the exact model name available on your self-hosted AI instance.

If anything else goes wrong, please contact support@shuffler.io
